
$ 1

SHORT ALMENSK GRAMMAR

Last updated: 8 april 2008.

1) Article: The definite article is "de" which is equivalent to "the." The indefinite article is "en" which means "a" or "an." There are no other articles.

2) Noun: The noun has no gender, and can end in any vowel or consonant. If the word ends in a consonant, the plural is formed by adding -ar; nouns that end in a vowel other than -a change the final vowel to -a and add -r.

3) Regular Verb: The infinitive of the verb ends in -a. The present tense form is the same as the infinitive. The imperative of most verbs is formed by the stem without the final -a. For example: 

Infinitive:	koma (to come)
Present: 	han koma
Imperative:	kom!

In the case of verbal stems ending in two (different) consonants, the imperative is formed by dropping the infinitival -a and inserting the vowel "e" between the final consonants of the stem. For example:

Infinitive:	opna (to open)
Present: 	han opna
Imperative: open!

The ending -a of the present tense is dropped in the case of the first member of a verbal phrase:

Je kan goa
Je vil goa (I want to go)
Je hav goad

Colloquially, the final -a of any active form (infinitive or present tense) can be dropped.

The past tense ends in -ad. There no distinction between past and past participle. 

The present participle ends in -ande. For purposes of scansion in poetry and song, the final -e may be dropped.

The future is formed with "skal" + infinitive. 

The conditional ("would") is formed with "skul" + infinitive.

$ 2

Irregular Verb: Except for auxiliary verbs, there is only one irregular verb, the verb "vara," which means "to be." The present tense, for all persons, is "er." The past tense is "var." The imperative is also"var." The future is "skal vara," and the conditional is "skul vara." Examples:

Je er, du er, han er
Je var, du var, han var
Je skal vara, du skal vara, han skal vara
Je skul vara, du skul vara, han skul vara
Imperative: Var so gu! Var en man!

The particple of the verb "vara" is "varad," so compound tenses of the verb can be formed: je hav varad, je skal hav varad, je skul hav varad, etc.

Auxiliary verbs are irregular in their use, as mentioned above with respect to verbal phrases. They fall into three classes, as follows:

Class 		Inf. 	Pres. 	Colloquial
Irreg 1 	kana	kan 	ka'
			hava 	hav 	ha'

Irreg 2		mosta	most	mo'

Irreg 3     --	 	skule	sku' (with emphasis) [should]
			--		skul	sku' (no emphasis) [would]

In addition to passive constructions formed with vara plus past tense, there is also an -s passive, formed by adding -s to the present tense form, or -es to the past tense form:

Det skrivas (it is written)

Det tinkades (it was thought)

4) Personal pronouns (with verb "to be"):

je er				je var
du er				du var
han/hon/det er		han/hon/det var

vi er				vi var
jer er				jer var
deje er, dom er		deje var, dom var

$ 3

The object/reflexive pronouns are: mej, dej, ham, sej, os, jej, dem. The impersonal ("one") is "man." 

The possessive pronouns are: min, din, hans/hons/dets, vor, jers, dejes, mans.

5) The alphabet is a simplified Scandinavian alphabet which does not include "ä" (or the Danish/Norwegian equivalent) but does include "ö." The letters "c" and "x" are only used in a few foreign words. The letter "y" is also not used. "å" becomes simply "o" or, rarely, "a." "Z" is only used in a few foreign words.

6) Numbers: en, tvo, tri (which becomes "tre" in compounds), fir, fem, seks, sju, otta, nio, tio, null. Twenty is "tvoti;" thirty is "treti;" thirteen is "treton." Hundred is "hundra;" thousand is "tusen." The year 2005 is "tvo tusen fem," NOT "tvoti hundra fem." In the case of centuries that do not coincide with millenia, however, the other style is used: 1945 is "nioton hundra firti fem." Further examples of number forms: eighteen = otton; eighty = otti; eighth= otte; eighteenth = ottonte; eightieth = ottite; hundredth = hundrate; thousandth = tusente. A thousand thousand = en miljon; millionth = miljonte. A thousand million = en biljon; billionth = biljonte.

7) There is a separate document on this subject (Accent.doc), which gives sufficient guidance. In general, the stress accent is placed as it would be in Scandinavian, for words of Germanic origin, and as it would be in French for words of Latin/French origin. In cases where the placement of the stress accent might not otherwise be obvious, use has been made of doubled final consonants on stressed syllables. Such doubled consonants do not indicate any difference in vowel length. Almensk does not have the intonation patterns that are found in Swedish and rural Norwegian. Neither does it have the myriad vowels that characterize some spoken Danish, or the "stöd." Almensk phonology, like its grammar, is simpler than those of the languages from which it comes. The writing, which is intended to be phonetic,  should be taken as a guide to the pronunciation.

8) New vocabulary should be added freely, according to the principles that can be observed in the accompanying dictionary. Care should be taken to choose forms that are consistent with Almensk phonology, that capitalize on the immense base of speakers of at least some English, and have as much international currency as possible. The basic rule for selection of lexical forms is to adapt a Scandinavian form when the English word is of Germanic origin, but to use a Scandinavianized Latin/Romance form when the English word is of Latin/Romance origin. Naturally, there are, and will be, exceptions.

9)  Adjectives may also serve as adverbs. Optionally, an adverbial -t may be added to the adjective form. For example, "behave badly" is either "komportera sej dorlig" or "komportera sej dorligt."


$ 4

10) The copula ("and") is normally "o," but for the sake of euphony it should be changed to "u" when the following word begins with "o." This should be done both in speech and in writing.

11) Infinitival and present tense "-a" can be dropped (especially in poetry and song) for reasons of euphony or the rhythm of a line or, colloquially, at any time. 

12) Almensk is an SVO language, and syntax is typically Germanic. Examples:

De hund bitad de man.

Je lika det ike, men den er de situasjon.

Tala du dansk?

Je tala ike dansk, men je tala almensk.

<$>
